# The Security Triangle Model

## 1. Introduction

I work in the field of IT Security for roughly two years now and before that I
have worked two years as an IT Continuity Officer. And I can say, thankfully,
that I have learned allot. The most important thing I probably have learned is
that it is nowhere near possible to know everything. The key is to be able to
create an overview of the entire situation in which you operate and, where
needed, to learn the skills needed for that specific task. Truth to be told,
that is much less easier done than being said.

As an IT Security Officer do I need to focus on Identity Management, Network
Security, Data Security, Security Architecture or any other topic? I would
likely say that you probably need to comprehend at least all fields (and more),
but also choose your own specialization. To complete the gaps in your knowledge
and experience you will need to look for co-workers and other sources to perform
your job.

Last year I completed my exam of CISSP and I got my title in November 2014. The
training course did not literately help me to extend my knowledge on very
specific topics (apart from Forensics I have to say), but the training helped me
to see the bigger picture in IT Security. There is many debate whether or not
certifications like CISSP are sensible or not, but for me it did add value to my
work as an IT Security professional.

In this repo I am going to share the foundations of my experience and
knowledge from the last couple of years in to a model. In this model I have set
out the most important topics and I am convinced that if these concepts can help
you in your profession, especially when you are new to this very interesting
field of work. I call this model the Security Triangle Model. First I’ll show
you the model and describe the basics, ethics and the rules for success in
Information Security.

As I have CISSP, did the training Ethical Hacking, and follow sources like
Isaca, SANS and many more, you might find the model below influenced by their
theories, frameworks and concepts.

## 2. Explanation

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/teusink/Security-Frameworks-and-Models/master/The-Security-Triangle/The-Security-Triangle-Model.jpg)

In The Security Triangle Model the topics comes in pairs of three. Just think
about concepts like people, process and technology. But also strategic, tactical
and operational and of course the well known confidentiality, integrity and
availability. What I did was looking at what I saw as dominant ‘mantras’ within
Information Security. Then I formulated three words with each concept and placed
it in the triangle.

It is a gray area obviously, but in a way I modeled the triangles in some form
of a hierarchic manner. In the end, privacy needs to be protected by security.
Whether it is your very own privacy or that of the company’s secrets, it needs
to be secure. So that is on the very top, the ultimate goal. But in order to get
there you need some ground work to do.

Skipping the rules for success and the ethics (which will be talked about
below), I will start with the first row of triangles. Security needs to be
addressed on every level in an organisation, it needs to be scoped on all three
elements within an organisation and in my opinion good Security is done based on
risk-management. But in order for this to work the organisation needs to embed
Security in its DNA using legislation, policies to enforce legislation and
procedures to implement the policies. And the flow of information (most often
the crown-jewels of an organization and also often the sensitive data of its
customers) needs to be addressed properly.

In the layer on top of that there is the well known Security triage. Then there
is the concept of intelligence, detection and response of Security incidents,
and that is where the magic happens when it comes down to trumping on incidents
like hacking and breaches that might (or will) occur. And when selecting the
solutions to address risks and vulnerabilities, always think in layered defense,
security by design and compartmentalization. And when that is done you will need
to think about how much trust you want, control you need and secrecy you grave
when you think about privacy.

### 2.1. Security Life Cycle Management

Everything is changing very fast. Whether it is the capability of hackers, new
Security solutions, laws, markets or your very own customers, you need to
respond quickly to this changing environment. On everything in your Security
organization you need to have proper life cycle management. Policies can
probably be reviewed on a 2-year basis, but technical solutions needs to be
under constant review. So on everything that is done to keep the crown-jewels
safe, life cycle it!

### 2.2. Rules for Success

Rules for success are important, as they determine how (yes, obviously)
successful you will be at your work.

It all starts with people first. If they are not safe all else does not matter.
If your co-workers are harmed by ‘Security’ measures or are harmed by the lack
of it, it all has failed already. The second is the support of your management.
For every decision, policy, security measure and investment you need management
support. If you don’t have it, you will likely fail eventually.

We also need to keep in mind that in the end everyone is responsible to do their
part to be secure. Everyone is responsible for their security in their private
lives, but at work all co-workers are responsible for the security of their
organization as a whole. You cannot outsource such responsibility. Therefore,
training is needed. Some need more training then others, but continues training
and growth of awareness are very important. Never waist a good crisis, so share
your security failures at least internally. This helps to make everyone
understand that a breach can happen fast and that a company going down effects
everyone in it.

But all the above does not help if you do not have the appropriate policies.
Policies are needed to show the employees what the boundaries, obligations and
rights are and how the should be kept and respected. Policies do not (or at
least should not) know any exceptions. An exception is document as a new policy.

### 2.3. Ethics

Ethics are important to prevent organisations and people going corrupt and harm
either the company itself or the society the operate in. The following rules are
inspired by the [(ISC)2 Code of
Ethics](https://www.isc2.org/ethics/default.aspx), but also by the [Isaca Code
of Professional
Ethics](https://www.isaca.org/Certification/Code-of-Professional-Ethics/Pages/default.aspx).

At first, protect the society and its infrastructure first. As a person, be
honorable and justly. Act responsible and comply to legal regulations and laws.
Provide a component service and where-ever possible, advance the profession you
work in.

### 3. End-word

There are many frameworks that address various of countermeasures and solutions
for risks and vulnerabilities and all those frameworks have their of course
their worth. What I hope to achieve with this model is to put it all in to one
view.

I hope I was of any value to you with sharing what I know and experienced and
that we can learn from each-other when we are discussing it. So feel free to
agree, disagree and certainly feel free to share your thoughts and questions in
the comments below.

*****
